[[Introducción al patrón]]
[[Ventajas del patrón]]
[[El cluster]]

Everything that has been said regarding the relationship of a concept with other elements of its context is valid to evaluate the relationship of a concept with its constituent elements: its specification reduces its intrinsic complexity to a point where this element can be described mostly from its constituent elements, also turned into concepts. This is how the ideal gas law, for instance, is made up of the concepts P, V, n, R, T, *, =, and also PV=nRT is itself a concept. The same happens with the ammonium molecule, which is composed of N and H, and also NH3, as a concept, is what determines its relationship between the formers. Likewise, lichen is a concept that contains the concepts of fungus and algae, each with its constituent concepts.

Here there is no point in claiming a system of concept orders containing concepts to arrive at some meta-scientific formalization that could certainly never be adapted to the variety of intra- and inter-relationships between concepts found in existing scientific models. It may be preferable to accept, as a given fact, that concepts have their own physiognomy and, depending on the model in question, may or may not be composed of other concepts. The possibility of containing concepts in concepts also reduces the formal characterization that is usually done for set-theoretical accounts, which generally states a set of elements plus a set of relationships between elements. In this case, the second set is no longer necessary, since the relationship between concepts is given by its particular place in another concept that contains it. On the other hand, because of what was said in the previous section on the gradation between the pattern and the annexes, there is no point in trying to specify the pattern as a concept made up of its elements.