[[El cluster]]

That a composite element, when conceptualized, is released from its context and thus becomes a bottomless figure, it means that its relationship with any other element that has not been as well conceptualized is weakened. There are times when the composite concept reaches such a specification that it can even become independent of other concepts within the pattern. But the process of cleaning a concept with respect to other elements until it is possible to specify, also in a unitary way, an exclusive relationship between a discrete list of their constitutive unitary elements, is a teleological aim to which scientists tend in the successive design of models. In such a limbo one could think of a relatively limited set of unitary elements with absolute specification that, being only connected to each other, can only define each one from the others. This constitutes a tautological state of the resultant composite concept, and the concept that is closest to this state is called cluster, in which each element is defined mainly from the other elements within the structure.

A cluster is a composite concept that has reached such a level of specification with its constituent elements that it becomes autonomous with respect to patterns, and therefore is susceptible, by the permanence principle, of being related to multiple patterns without undergoing substantial modifications. Just as the permanence principle announces that a concept, by becoming independent of its context, begins to be able to relate to a multiplicity of elements without being itself modified, so also the cluster that becomes independent from the other elements of a pattern can be related with a multiplicity of patterns without being substantially modified. Although an exhaustive review of the concepts usually handled in science that are close to the idea of cluster will not be carried out here, it can be advanced that, in physical sciences, laws, principles and axioms are clusters, while in biological sciences stereotypes are clusters.

The cluster becomes stronger the less it includes little conceptualized elements, which, on the other hand, it does not seem to be able to do without. Certainly, if an array of conceptual elements can only be fully defined each exclusively from the others within the same group, this array would not have the possibility of being inserted into a model, since for this it will need to be related to annexes elements, and this same relationship breaks inevitably the purity of the definition of each unitary element. This is the reason why an absolute specification is not feasible, and the unitary character of the elements, even participants in a cluster, can never become strictly universal nor strictly immutable. Newton's first law appears to be a fairly close case to this, since Force, Mass and Acceleration interact with each other into the law so that each parameter makes sense from the other two. But not in such a way that it prevents them from interacting with others, for example with the constant 2π and the variable L in a simple gravity pendulum T = 2π√Lg.